Block Ciphers
=============

There are two further types of symmetric keys: stream and block
ciphers.  Stream ciphers operate on data streams, i.e. one byte at
a time. Block ciphers operate on blocks of data, typically 16 bytes
at a time. The most common block cipher and the standard one you
should use unless you have a very good reason to use another one
is the
[AES](https://secure.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/wiki/Advanced_Encryption_Standard)
block cipher, also documented in [FIPS PUB
197](http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/fips/fips197/fips-197.pdf). AES
is a specific subset of the Rijndael cipher. AES uses block size
of 128-bits (16 bytes); data should be padded out to fit the block
size - the length of the data block must be multiple of the block
size. For example, given an input of `ABCDABCDABCDABCD ABCDABCDABCDABCD`
no padding would need to be done.  However, given `ABCDABCDABCDABCD
ABCDABCDABCD` an additional 4 bytes of padding would need to be
added. A common padding scheme is to use `0x80` as the first byte
of padding, with `0x00` bytes filling out the rest of the padding.
With padding, the previous example would look like:
`ABCDABCDABCDABCD ABCDABCDABCD\x80\x00\x00\x00`.

Writing a padding function is pretty easy:

   def pad_data(data):
       # return data if no padding is required
       if len(data) % 16 == 0: 
           return data

       # subtract one byte that should be the 0x80
       # if 0 bytes of padding are required, it means only
       # a single \x80 is required.

       padding_required     = 15 - (len(data) % 16)

       data = '%s\x80' % data
       data = '%s%s' % (data, '\x00' * padding_required)

       return data

Similarly, removing padding is also easy:

    def unpad_data(data):
        if not data: 
            return data
 
        data = data.rstrip('\x00')
        if data[-1] == '\x80':
            return data[:-1]
        else:
            return data


Encryption with a block cipher requires selecting a [block
mode](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Block_cipher_mode).  By far the
most common mode used is **cipher block chaining** or *CBC* mode.
Other modes include *counter (CTR)*, *cipher feedback (CFB)*, and
the extremely insecure *electronic codebook (ECB)*. CBC mode is the
standard and is well-vetted, so I will stick to that in this tutorial.
Cipher block chaining works by XORing the previous block of ciphertext
with the current block. You might recognise that the first block
has nothing to be XOR'd with; enter the [*initialisation
vector*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Initialization_vector).  This
comprises a number of randomly-generated bytes of data the same
size as the cipher's block size. This initialisation vector should
random enough that it cannot be recovered.

One of the most critical components to encryption is properly
generating random data. Fortunately, most of this is handled by the
PyCrypto library’s `Crypto.Random.OSRNG module`. You should know
that the more entropy sources that are available (such as network
traffic and disk activity), the faster the system can generate
cryptographically-secure random data. I’ve written a function that
can generate a
[*nonce*](https://secure.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/wiki/Cryptographic_nonce)
suitable for use as an initialisation vector. This will work on a
UNIX machine; the comments note how easy it is to adapt it to a
Windows machine. This function requires a version of PyCrypto at
least 2.1.0 or higher.

    import Crypto.Random.OSRNG.posix as RNG
 
    def generate_nonce():
        return RNG.new().read(AES.block_size)

I will note here that the python \`random\` module is completely
unsuitable for cryptography (as it is completely deterministic). You
shouldn’t use it for cryptographic code.

Symmetric ciphers are so-named because the key is shared across any
entities.  There are three key sizes for AES: 128-bit, 192-bit, and
256-bit, aka 16-byte, 24-byte, and 32-byte key sizes. Instead, we just
need to generate 32 random bytes (and make sure we keep track of it)
and use that as the key:

    KEYSIZE = 32


    def generate_key():
        return RNG.new().read(KEY_SIZE)


We can use this key to encrypt and decrypt data. To encrypt, we
need the initialisation vector (i.e. a nonce), the key, and the
data. However, the IV isn't a secret. When we encrypt, we'll prepend
the IV to our encrypted data and make that part of the output. We
can (and should) generate a completely random IV for each new
message.


    def encrypt(data, key):
        """
        Encrypt data using AES in CBC mode. The IV is prepended to the
        ciphertext.
        """
        data = pad_data(data)
        ivec = generate_nonce()
        aes = AES.new(key, AES.MODE_CBC, ivec)
        ctxt = aes.encrypt(data)
        return ivec + ctxt


    def decrypt(ciphertext, key):
        """
        Decrypt a ciphertext encrypted with AES in CBC mode; assumes the IV
        has been prepended to the ciphertext.
        """
        if len(ciphertext) <= AES.block_size:
            raise Exception("Invalid ciphertext.")
        ivec = ciphertext[:AES.block_size]
        ciphertext = ciphertext[AES.block_size:]
        aes = AES.new(key, AES.MODE_CBC, ivec)
        data = aes.decrypt(ciphertext)
        return unpad_data(data)


However, this is only part of the equation for securing messages:
AES only gives us confidentiality. Remember how we had a few other
criteria? We still need to add integrity and authenticity to our
process. Readers with some experience might immediately think of
hashing algorithms, like MD5 (which should be avoided like the
plague) and SHA. The problem with these is that they are malleable:
it is easy to change a digest produced by one of these algorithms,
and there is no indication it's been changed. We need, a hash
function that uses a key to generate the digest; the one we'll use
is called HMAC. We do not want the same key used to encrypt the
message; we should have a new, freshly generated key that is the
same size as the digest's output size (although in many cases, this
will be overkill).

In order to encrypt properly, then, we need to modify our code a bit.
The first thing, you need to know is that HMAC is based on a
particular SHA function. Since we're using AES-256, we'll use SHA-384.
We say our message tags are computed using HMAC-SHA-384. This
produces a 48-byte digest. Let's add a few new constants in, and
update the KEYSIZE variable:

    __aes_keylen = 32
    __tag_keylen = 48
    KEYSIZE = __aes_keylen + __tag_keylen

Now, let's add message tagging in:

    import Crypto.Hash.HMAC as HMAC
    import Crypto.Hash.SHA384 as SHA384

    def new_tag(ciphertext, key):
        """Compute a new message tag using HMAC-SHA-384."""
	return HMAC.new(key, msg=ciphertext, digestmod=SHA384).digest()

Here's our updated encrypt function:

    def encrypt(data, key):
        """
        Encrypt data using AES in CBC mode. The IV is prepended to the
        ciphertext.
        """
        data = pad_data(data)
        ivec = generate_nonce()
        aes = AES.new(key[:__aes_keylen], AES.MODE_CBC, ivec)
        ctxt = aes.encrypt(data)
        tag = new_tag(ctxt, key[__aes_keylen:]) 
        return ivec + ctxt + tag

Decryption has a snag: what we want to do is check to see if the
message tag matches what we think it should be. However, the Python
`==` operator stops matching on the first character it finds that
doesn't match. This opens a verification based on the `==` operator
to a timing attack. Without going into much detail, note that several
cryptosystems have fallen prey to this exact attack; the keyczar
system, for example, use the `==` operator and suffered an attack
on the system. We'll use the `streql` package (i.e. `pip install
streql`) to perform a constant-time comparison of the tags.

    import streql


    __taglen = 48


    def verify_tag(ciphertext, key):
        """Verify the tag on a ciphertext."""
        tag_start = len(ciphertext) - __taglen
        data = ciphertext[:tag_start]
        tag = ciphertext[tag_start:]
        actual_tag = new_tag(data, key)
        return streql.equals(actual_tag, tag)

We'll also change our decrypt function to return a tuple: the
original message (or None on failure), and a boolean that will be
True if the tag was authenticated and the message decrypted

    def decrypt(ciphertext, key):
        """
        Decrypt a ciphertext encrypted with AES in CBC mode; assumes the IV
        has been prepended to the ciphertext.
        """
        if len(ciphertext) <= AES.block_size:
            return None, False
        tag_start = len(ciphertext) - __TAG_LEN
        ivec = ciphertext[:AES.block_size]
        data = ciphertext[AES.block_size:tag_start]
        if not verify_tag(ciphertext, key[__AES_KEYLEN:]):
            return None, False
        aes = AES.new(key[:__AES_KEYLEN], AES.MODE_CBC, ivec)
        data = aes.decrypt(data)
        return unpad_data(data), True

We could also generate a key using a passphrase, but this is
significantly more complex: you should use a key derivation algorithm,
such as [PBKDF2](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pbkdf2). A function
to derivate a key from a passphrase will also need to store the
salt that goes with the passphrase. PBKDF2 will generate a salt to
go along with the password; the salt is analogous to the initialisation
vector and can be stored alongside the password.

That should cover the basics of block cipher encryption. We’ve
gone over key generation, padding, and encryption / decryption.


